<!--
.. title: Ignoring changes in git locally
.. slug: a-local-only-gitignore
.. date: 2025-10-31 14:19:23 UTC-03:00
.. tags: git, til, gitignore
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

It is well known that in a git repository we can use a [`.gitignore`](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore) file to skip tracking files that we don't want to be pushed to the remote repository. If a file matches a `.gitignore` pattern, it will not be shown in a `git status` to add its eventual changes to a commit.

Typically, they are used to ignore directories where dependencies are installed (e.g. the virtualenv for python projects generally installed in `.venv`), temporary files generated by the interpreter or compiler, specific files for IDEs, etc.

They are so common that Github offers [gitignore templates](https://github.com/github/gitignore) curated for different programming languages and specific tools for initializing projects like [uv init](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/init/) generate a basic `.gitignore` as part of the *boilerplate*.

A `.gitignore` is part of the project (it is committed) and it is important that it is in the repository so that all collaborators have the same configuration.

But what happens if we want to ignore files only locally?

<!-- TEASER_END -->


For this, there are two ways:

- `.git/info/exclude` inside the project, which has the same format but is not versioned in the repository and only affects the current repository.
- `$HOME/.config/git/ignore` fulfills the same function but affects all repositories of the user.


Some extra tips? If you want to know all the ignored files in the repo:

```
git status --ignored
```

If you have complex patterns or several `.gitignore` files at different levels, you can see which files are being ignored by which configuration with:

```
git check-ignore -v <file>
```